Title: Cluster-Weighted Training of Deep Surrogate Models for Subgrid Turbulent Transport

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.07925v1

Published Time: Fri, 10 Jul 2026 00:13:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# Cluster-Weighted Training of Deep Surrogate Models for Subgrid Turbulent Transport 

Rimsha Hameed Syeda 

Department of Computer Science Georgia State University 

Atlanta, Georgia 

Dustin Kempton 

Department of Computer Science Georgia State University 

Atlanta, Georgia 

Viacheslav Sadykov 

Department of Physics and Astronomy Georgia State University 

Atlanta, Georgia 

Irina Kitiashvili 

Computational Physics Branch NASA Ames Research Center 

Moffett Field, California 

Rafal Angryk 

Department of Computer Science Georgia State University 

Atlanta, Georgia 

Abstract —Turbulence in the solar interior and atmosphere plays a crucial role in energy transport, yet modeling its subgrid-scale effects remains a major challenge. This study leverages machine learning (ML) models to predict components of the Reynolds stress tensor using high-resolution StellarBox simula-tions of the quiet Sun. Previously, we have compared a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) and a 3D Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) against physics-based baselines to achieve a lower Mean Squared Error (MSE) and better generalization across various heights and depths in the solar atmosphere. To enhance learning, in this work, we investigate cluster-weighted training using K-Means and Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering (HAC). By weighing the loss function based on cluster-specific prediction errors, we direct the model’s attention to high-error regions. It significantly improves CNN performance, achieving 34% lower MSE and a significantly higher R² score indicating that integrat-ing deterministic clustering with ML is a promising technique for modeling subgrid turbulence, in particular, and regression in diverse environments, in general. 

Index Terms —Surrogate Modeling, Turbulence, K-Means Clustering, Weighted-training, Reynolds Stress Tensor 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Subgrid turbulence refers to the motions and interactions that occur at scales smaller than the grid resolution of a simulation and result in energy dissipation and momentum transport. Simulations typically maintain a trade-off between computational feasibility and ability to capture the high-resolution dynamics (both related to the characteristic scales of the modeled phenomena and the number of computational grid cells in each direction). In recent years, machine learning (ML) techniques, in particular, deep learning models, have shown promise in improving subgrid scale (SGS) models for magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations by learning directly from high-fidelity high-resolution simulation data or observations [1], [2]. Adapting these data-driven approaches can enable the development of more accurate and efficient surrogate SGS models for turbulent plasma and allows fast estimation of subgrid-scale turbulence feedback for a specific simulation run. It will significantly reduce the computational cost of MHD simulations for surrogate modeling purposes (such as exploration of the initial conditions space) without expensive additional computations involving high-resolution and more realistic physics-based turbulence models. The overall idea of the current work follows the paper [2], where high-resolution simulations of supernova explosions are utilized and the ability to run lower-resolution simulations by utilizing subgrid estimates of the higher-resolution properties is demonstrated. Their results show that the simulation do-main behaves similarly to high-resolution simulations. In our follow-up work ( [3], briefly described in the current paper as well), we adopted their approach to simulations of the quiet Sun, utilizing realistic 3D solar radiative hydrodynamic simulations from [4] obtained with StellarBox simulation code [5], [6], along with exploring more sophisticated structures of deep learning models such as Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) and 3D Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). Our results indicated that both MLP and CNN models can approximate the subgrid stress tensors more accurately with respect to the physics-based Gradient and Smagorinsky models. In the current work, we aim to further improve the accuracy of the CNN model by introducing a cluster-weighted training. II. B ACKGROUND 

In subgrid-scale turbulence modeling, the Reynolds stress tensor is a key quantity of interest, representing the correlation of the small-scale velocity field, which produces additional terms in MHD equations and can lead to kinetic energy dissipation and momentum transport. It is defined as: 

τ ij = guiuj − ˜ui ˜uj (1) Here ui is the i-th component of the velocity, guiuj represents the average of the product of two components, and ˜ui indicates the averaged value of the variable, both over the spatial scale of interest. We note here that very often the ux component of the velocity is noted in simulation approaches as u, the uy

component as v, and the uz component as w. We will follow these notations in the current work. arXiv:2607.07925v1 [astro-ph.SR] 8 Jul 2026 Turbulence in the solar convection zone is anisotropic and inhomogeneous [7] with convective scales increasing and flows becoming more homogeneous with depth, as shown in recent 3D radiative hydrodynamic modeling [8]. Traditional methods for estimating the Reynolds stress tensor in the convection zone rely on the spatial derivatives and statistics of the macroscopic flows, such as the gradient model [2], the Smagorinsky model [9], and the dynamic Smagorinsky model [10]. As in [3], here we utilize two physics-based subgrid models as the baselines for this study: the gradient model and the Smagorinsky model. Recent studies such as [11], [12] have explored deep learn-ing for modeling turbulent flows. However, they typically use uniform training strategies that overlook spatial variability in model error. In contrast, our framework incorporates cluster-weighted training to explicitly account for heterogeneous regions in the input space. III. D ATASET 

We considered the 3D radiative hydrodynamic simulations with the StellarBox code that were previously used in [4], [13]. The simulated data are in the format of 512 ×512 ×512 size data cubes, with a spatial resolution of 12.5 km in the horizontal scale (and a comparable uniform vertical scale), with a cadence of 30 s. The data cubes have about 1 Mm of the atmosphere above the geometrical h = 0 km height, and 

∼5.4 Mm of the subphotospheric region. Because of the high resolution, we use these simulations to compute the Reynolds stress tensors directly (i.e., we do not assume any additional contribution from the Reynolds stresses at the subgrid-scale of this high-resolution model). The illustration of the behavior of the vertical velocity at different heights and depths of the simulations is displayed in Figure 1, reflecting different spatial structures of the plasma motions. In order to train the ML SGS model, we must first extract and label the data from the existing simulation. The character-istic time scale at the solar photosphere is ∼ 5 − 10 minutes. Therefore, we used every 10th data cube (or a 5-minute cadence) in the data series, a total of 25 data cubes, which allows us to make each considered data cube less dependent on the others. We then slice each data cube into 4 ×4×4 sub-cubes, effectively decreasing the resolution 4 times. For each third sub-cube in each direction, we compute the Reynolds stress tensor components directly following Equation. 1. We also compute the average density in this sub-cube, and aver-age velocities in this and its 26 neighboring sub-cubes. The resulting task is to predict the τ ij components in the central sub-cube based on their density and surrounding velocity fields. Because of the non-overlapping spatial sampling and sufficiently large temporal sampling, we ensure that our dataset consists of non-correlated data points and, therefore, could be split into train-validation-test datasets randomly. The final data set has ∼1.8 M individual data points sampling the upper solar convection zone and a lower photosphere. Each training sample was represented as an 82-dimensional feature vector, incorporating the 3D neighborhood ( 3 × 3 × 3 cube) of three velocity components u, v, w and a scalar average density in the central cell. The six τ ij components are targets. The preprocessing strategy closely follows the methodology in our previous work [3]. All input features were standardized using Z-score normalization using StandardScaler [14], ensuring zero mean and unit variance between velocity and density vari-ables. This normalization step equalizes feature influence and aids model convergence. We also transform the target variables (τ ij components) to address strong skewness and variance instability. The diagonal components were log-transformed to improve normality, while off-diagonal components underwent a signed logarithmic transformation to preserve directional information. Finally, all transformed targets were standardized and range-scaled. This approach has been shown to stabilize training and improve model performance, particularly in re-gression tasks involving turbulent flow variables. IV. M ETHODOLOGY 

A. CNN Architecture and Training 

To model the non-linear relationship between local macro-scopic flows and the subgrid Reynolds stress tensor, we design a 3D Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) trained on high-resolution StellarBox data. The CNN architecture used in this work is identical to that introduced in our previous study [3]. The 3 × 3 × 3 cube of velocity components ( u, v, w ) are treated as separate channels passed through 3D convolutional layers to extract spatial features, which are then flattened and concatenated with the scalar density before entering fully con-nected layers that predict the six components of the Reynolds stress tensor. CNN was trained using Adam Optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001, a batch size of 128, with early stopping based on validation loss. Each convolution layer uses a 3 × 3 × 3 kernel, and filter counts were increased in deeper layers to improve pattern recognition. The model was trained using a Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss function. For complete architectural and training details, refer to the Model Architecture and Parameter Tuning sections in [3]. The performance of the models was compared to both the Gradient and the Smagorinsky baselines across all stress components. 

B. Cluster-wise Error Analysis 

To investigate spatial variations in model performance and the feasibility of the initial motivation for the cluster-based approach described further, we perform a cluster-wise analysis on the CNN model trained with a standard uniform MSE loss. After training the baseline CNN following [3], we apply K-Means clustering ( K = 5, Section V-B) to the feature space (macroscopic velocities and the density) of the training samples. We then compute the Mean Squared Error (MSE) for each cluster based on the CNN’s predictions. Figure 2a presents the per-cluster MSE for each of the six 

τij components, computed using predictions from the CNN-trained baseline. Although some clusters maintain relatively low error across all components, others consistently show elevated MSE. This indicates that certain regions of the input space are inherently harder to model, potentially due to more Fig. 1. Illustration of vertical velocities in the simulations ( uz , or w) at the different heights of the simulation domain. One can note the changes in the spatial structures and velocity magnitudes when encountering different depths. 

complex flow patterns or sharp gradients in velocity and density. The disparity in error magnitudes between clusters highlights the limitation of uniform loss, where all samples contribute equally to the loss function. One can also see from Figure 2b that clustering does not isolate regions only based on their heights. While almost all points at the depth of ∼-5 Mm belong to Cluster 0, the points in the solar atmosphere (here, 0-1 Mm height) represent four different clusters. By identifying high-error clusters through this analysis, we jus-tify the introduction of cluster-weighted training to prioritize learning in regions where the model underperforms. V. I MPLEMENTATION AND CLUSTERING STRATEGY 

A. Clustering Method and Setup 

To enhance regression accuracy using cluster-based loss weighting, we apply unsupervised clustering to partition the training data into representative subgroups. These clusters were then used to assign sample-specific weights in the loss function, with the aim of correcting imbalances in prediction error between inputs belonging to different clusters. Specif-ically, we aim to apply the K-Means algorithm to divide the training data according to their input characteristics (flat-tened or encoded), resulting in k clusters C1, C 2, . . . , C k.This unsupervised segmentation allows us to assess prediction errors in structurally distinct input regions, facilitating targeted reweighting in subsequent training phases [15]. Clustering is applied directly to the 82 feature vectors, described in Section IV-A. The number of clusters was fixed at k = 5 based on minimizing the average silhouette width scores, a metric that quantifies the quality of clustering by measuring cohesion and separation [16]. Since K-Means clustering is sensitive to initial centroid selection, two variants of K-Means were evaluated (a) (b) Fig. 2. (a) Cluster-wise MSE (cm 4/ s4) for each τij component using baseline CNN predictions. (b) Distribution of clusters as a function of height. 

to investigate the role of clustering quality and initialization strategies:  

> •

Standard KMeans : selects k initial centroids uniformly at random from the data;  

> •

KMeans++ : selects centroid using probability propor-tional to its squared distance from the closest existing centroid [17]. Standard K-Means can lead to poor local minima or unstable clustering. In contrast, K-Means++ improves this by choosing the initial centroids sequentially. This encourages diverse and well-separated initial seeds, often resulting in faster con-vergence and better final clustering outcomes. K-Means is inherently non-deterministic unless its random initialization state is fixed. For each method, we performed 20 runs with different random seeds to study the sensitivity of clustering outcomes to initialization. 

B. Inertia as Evaluation Criterion 

We used silhouette scores to determine the optimal number of clusters ( k), selecting the value that maximized average sil-houette width. However, to assess the stability and consistency of clustering across different random initializations, we used 

Inertia , the sum of squared distances from each sample to its assigned cluster centroid, as our primary diagnostic. Inertia is directly optimized by K-Means and provides a practical, interpretable metric for comparing runs in high-dimensional settings. This combination allowed us to ensure both mean-ingful cluster separation and reliable grouping behavior for use in our weighted training strategy. Across all 20 runs, we found that the total inertia values were consistently centered around 1.08 million, with minimal variation across seeds. This indicated that our dataset exhibited stable clustering behavior, likely due to its large size (1.44 mil-lion samples used for clustering) and sufficient structure in the KMeans++ KMeans (Random)  

> 5.25
> 5.50
> 5.75
> 6.00
> 6.25
> 6.50
> 6.75
> Inertia
> +1.08695e6
> Distribution of Inertia Across Random States
> Fig. 3. Distribution of inertia across random states using KMeans++ and random initialization.

feature space. As expected, KMeans++ yielded slightly lower inertia on average compared to standard KMeans, demonstrat-ing its ability to produce tighter clusters more reliably. As shown in Figure 3, both clustering methods produced highly stable results across initializations. Given the small variance in inertia, we concluded that random initialization has little impact on the final cluster assignments in this application. However, K-Means++ was adopted for subsequent training due to its marginal but con-sistent improvements. 

C. Selection of Cluster Configurations for Training 

From the 20 clustering runs, we selected five representative cluster configurations to use in training the cluster-weighted CNN: 1) The clustering with the lowest inertia , representing the most compact clusters; 2) The clustering with the highest inertia , capturing the worst-case compactness; 3) Three additional clustering arrangements were sampled randomly from the remaining runs to ensure diversity. These configurations were then used to retrain the CNN model with a cluster-weighted loss function as defined in algorithm 4 in Section V-D. By comparing model perfor-mance across these clusterings, we were able to evaluate how the quality of clustering, as reflected by inertia, impacts the effectiveness of cluster-based training. Despite selecting clustering configurations with both high and low inertia, we observed that the variation in model perfor-mance across these runs was relatively small. This reinforces the conclusion that the cluster-weighted training procedure is not highly sensitive to the specific initialization used in K-Means if the inertia variation is minimal. The consistently low variation in inertia across different seeds suggests that the input space has inherent structure that is reliably captured by the clustering algorithm, making the weighted loss framework robust and repeatable. 

D. Cluster-Weighted Training Method 

The weighting strategy shown in 4 is described below. After splitting the data into training and testing sets, we apply KMeans++ clustering ( K = 5 ) to the normalized training set (velocities and density). CNN is first trained for T0 = 10 

epochs using standard MSE loss to obtain initial predictions. For each sample, we compute the total squared error across all targets, and calculate the mean error M SE k for the cluster 

k. Cluster weights wk are then assigned proportional to the relative error, scaled by a factor α = 3 , which emphasizes higher-error clusters without destabilizing training or overfit-ting the noisy samples. These weights are incorporated into a custom loss function, where each sample’s contribution to the loss is multiplied by its cluster’s weight. VI. E XPERIMENTS & R ESULTS 

A. Alternative Clustering Strategies 

In addition to K-Means, we explored Hierarchical Agglom-erative Clustering (HAC) and DBSCAN to cluster the training data:  

> •

In Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering(HAC) , clus-ters are formed by iteratively merging data points that minimize within-cluster variance. We experimented with HAC using Ward linkage, which iteratively merges pairs of clusters to minimize intra-cluster variance. This                                                                               

> Require: Normalized input features X, target values y, number of clusters
> K,initial model fθ,scaling factor α,initial training epochs T0,maximum weighted training epochs T, early stopping patience p.1: Split X, y into training and testing sets 2: Apply KMeans++ on Xtrain to obtain cluster labels ci∈ { 1, . . . , K }
> 3: Initial Training: Train fθfor T0epochs using standard MSE loss:
> LMSE =1
> N·T
> NX
> i=1
> TX
> j=1
> (fθ(xi)j−yij )2
> where Tis the number of targets per sample 4: Compute Cluster-Wise Errors: For each sample i, compute the total squared error:
> ℓi=
> TX
> j=1
> (fθ(xi)j−yij )2
> 5: Compute mean squared error MSE kfor each cluster k:MSE k=1
> |Ck|
> X
> i∈Ck
> ℓi
> where Ckis the set of samples in cluster k
> 6: Compute weight for each cluster:
> wk= 1 + α·MSE k
> max jMSE j
> where jindexes over Kclusters to compute max MSE 7: Define custom weighted loss:
> L=1
> N
> NX
> i=1
> wci· ∥ fθ(xi)−yi∥2
> 8: Retrain fθusing the weighted loss for Tepochs with early stopping p 9: return Trained model fθ
> Fig. 4. Cluster-Weighted Training

method is well-suited for uncovering hierarchical struc-ture in the data, but is computationally expensive. Due to memory constraints, we were only able to perform cluster-weighted training using HAC on a subset compris-ing 2.5% of the full training data. This limited the stability and resolution of the resulting clusters and prevented effective loss reweighting. As shown in Table I, even with power-based weighting ( wc ∝ ρ−p), the HAC-trained models significantly underperformed compared to both the KMeans-based model and the original CNN baseline. Despite this, the HAC experiments confirmed that error heterogeneity is a consistent feature of the training space, supporting our motivation for cluster-aware loss strategies.  

> •

DBSCAN is a density-based clustering method that iden-tifies arbitrarily shaped clusters and separates outliers. However, DBSCAN was computationally expensive, re-quired sensitive parameter tuning (epsilon, minPts), and produced highly imbalanced clusters in high-dimensional feature space. To directly evaluate performance, we implemented a variant of the cluster-weighted CNN using HAC-derived clusters and customized power-based weights proportional to inverse cluster density (e.g., wc ∝ ρ−p). These results are summarized in Table I. While all methods confirmed the existence of the regions that were modeled with varying precision, K-Means offered more stable, balanced, and consistently im-proving clusters for loss reweighting. HAC-based weighting schemes underperformed even with tuning, and DBSCAN was discarded due to its instability in high-dimensional sparse data. 

B. Comparison of PDF 

The probability distribution functions (PDFs) of two dif-ferent models (the baseline CNN and the cluster-weighted CNN, ClCNN) are visualized against the actual values of 

τ vv and τ uw Reynolds stresses in Figure 5. It is evident that the standard CNN underestimates extreme values and overconcentrates around the mean. In contrast, the cluster-weighted CNN more accurately captures both the peak and the heavy tails of the true distribution. This suggests improved modeling of rare or complex turbulent states — regions associated with higher training error and underrepresentation. These improvements are also pronounced in off-diagonal stress components (τuv , τ uw , τ vw , see Table I), which are more sensitive to local shear and density variations, reinforcing the effectiveness of cluster-based weighting in learning high-error regions. We note that in our previous work [3], the improvement for modeling the off-diagonal components with respect to physics-based turbulence models was modest in comparison with the diagonal components. 

C. Average MSE and R 2 Score Comparison 

We compare the average Mean Squared Error (MSE) and R2 score across all six Reynolds stress components τij for each CNN model evaluated. The cluster-weighted CNN trained using KMeans clustering reduces average MSE by more than 34% compared to the baseline CNN and shows improved generalization, in high-error regions. 

D. Error Distribution and Scatter Plot Comparisons 

We analyze the distribution of absolute prediction errors across models using histogram plots, and examine the scatter relationship between predicted and true values for key stress components. Figure 6 compares the histograms of absolute errors for τvv and τuw , highlighting differences in prediction accuracy across models. The standard CNN produces a wider error spread with a heavier right tail, especially for off-diagonal components like τuw . The cluster-weighted CNN shifts the distribution leftward, reducing the frequency of large errors and improving concentration around zero. This indicates more stable predictions across turbulent regimes, particularly in underrepresented or high-variance regions. To assess prediction fidelity, we plot predicted vs. true values for selected components in Figure 7. The CNN un-derpredicts large-magnitude values and exhibits vertical scat-ter, especially in low-density regimes. The cluster-weighted CNN(ClCNN) achieves tighter alignment with the identity line, indicating more consistent recovery of true stress magni-tudes. Outliers are reduced, suggesting better handling of edge cases and improved robustness in complex flow regimes. These results further confirm that incorporating cluster-aware loss leads to more accurate and physically consistent predictions, particularly in regions of the data that were previously underfit. Figure 8 illustrates the median relative improvement of the cluster-weighted CNN over the baseline CNN model. The Fig-ure 8a shows improvements across clusters for each Reynolds Stress Tensor component, where certain clusters, 2 and 4, exhibit a reduction in median error of approximately 30-60%. This confirms that the error heterogeneity is strongly linked to input data segmentation. The analysis in Figure 8b localizes error reduction in physically meaningful height ranges with the most pronounced gains occurring between -1000 and 0 km, where errors are reduced up to 50%. These regions correspond to the upper convection zone and lower atmosphere, which are typically harder to model due to sharp gradients and complex turbulent flows. VII. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

In this study, we introduced a cluster-weighted training framework to improve the accuracy of a deep learning sur-rogate model for subgrid turbulent transport. The model is trained on data derived from high-resolution 3D radiative hydrodynamic simulations of the quiet Sun. Building upon our previous CNN-based surrogate [3], we improved model performance by incorporating a K-Means-driven loss reweight-ing scheme that targets regions with high prediction error. The identified regions were heavily weighted in the loss function during retraining. This strategy led to a significant improvement in model performance across all components of the Reynolds stress tensor, reducing the average MSE by over 34% and improving the R 2 score from 0.54 to 0.80 compared to the CNN baseline. The improvements were notable for off-diagonal components, which are more sensitive to local shear and density variations. We also compared alternative clustering techniques, including HAC and DBSCAN, which revealed error heterogeneity, but were less effective due to memory limitations and high-dimensional instability. K-Means was found to be the most robust and computationally efficient in our setting. This work demonstrates that targeted loss reweighting using unsupervised clustering can substantially improve surrogate model generalization in turbulent flow pre-diction. In practice, the weighted training added an overhead of 15–20% due to clustering and reweighting, while the inference time remains identical to the baseline since the architecture is unchanged. The analysis also highlights that cluster-weighted training not only enhances global metrics but also yields significant localized benefits in both feature-space-defined clusters and physically relevant height ranges. Future work will explore: (1) evaluating model generaliza-tion across varying spatial and temporal resolutions to assess scale sensitivity; (2) incorporating magnetic field features to enhance surrogate accuracy in magnetoconvection settings [1], [18]; (3) investigating alternative architectures such as Vision Transformers (ViTs) to better capture long-range spatial dependencies in turbulent flows; and (4) comparing cluster-weighted training with uncertainty-based sampling strategies, TABLE I RMSE ( CM 2/S2 ) ACROSS τij USING CNN WITH UNIFORM , K-M EANS , AND HAC-BASED POWER -WEIGHTED LOSS SCHEMES .

Method τuu τuv τuw τvv τvw τww 

CNN (uniform) 2.36e+09 1.42e+09 1.67e+09 2.50e+09 1.70e+09 3.13e+09 CNN (KMeans) 1.65e+09 8.83e+08 9.93e+08 1.71e+09 9.92e+08 2.70e+09 

HAC, p = 2 4.35e+09 1.69e+09 1.91e+09 4.43e+09 1.98e+09 5.28e+09 HAC, p = 1 3.99e+09 1.66e+09 1.95e+09 4.06e+09 2.01e+09 4.91e+09 HAC, p = 0 .5 4.22e+09 1.71e+09 1.96e+09 4.09e+09 2.01e+09 4.31e+09 HAC, p = 0 .25 4.34e+09 1.67e+09 1.96e+09 4.16e+09 1.99e+09 4.84e+09 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 

(cm 2/sec 2) 1e11       

> 10 14
> 10 13
> 10 12
> 10 11
> 10 10
> 10 9
> PDF
> vv
> Actual CNN ClCNN

(a) 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 

(cm 2/sec 2) 1e11       

> 10 14
> 10 13
> 10 12
> 10 11
> 10 10
> PDF
> uw
> Actual CNN ClCNN

(b) Fig. 5. Distributions of components τvv (a) and τuw (b). Blue curves show the original target data, orange shows the predictions of the CNN, and gray shows the predictions of the cluster-weighted CNN (ClCNN). 

Model Average MSE Average R 2

CNN (uniform loss) 4.89 × 10 18 0.54 CNN (cluster-weighted, KMeans) 3.01 × 10 18 0.80 

CNN (cluster-weighted, HAC on 2.5% data) 

1.03 × 10 19 0.37 TABLE II AVERAGE MSE AND R2 SCORE ACROSS ALL τ COMPONENTS .

aiming to develop an adaptive training framework that prior-itizes informative, high-error samples. In the long term, our goal is to incorporate the developed models directly into the StellarBox simulation code in place of the current physics-based subgrid turbulence models. This will also allow us to perform the proper physical validation as well, by directly comparing the lower-resolution simulation runs with the ML surrogate subgrid turbulence models and the higher-resolution simulation runs initiated with the same boundary and initial conditions. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This project has been supported in part by funding from NASA’s COFFIES DRIVE Science Center grant 80NSSC22M0162. It has also been supported in part by the NSF Faculty Development in geoSpace Science program through grant 1936361. REFERENCES [1] J. P. Panda, “Reynolds Stress Modeling Using Data Driven Machine Learning Algorithms,” arXiv e-prints , 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2111.07043 [2] P. I. Karpov, C. Huang, I. Sitdikov, C. L. Fryer, S. Woosley, and G. Pilania, “Physics-informed machine learning for modeling turbulence in supernovae,” The Astrophysical Journal , vol. 940, no. 1, p. 26, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ac88cc [3] R. H. Syeda, D. Kempton, V. Sadykov, I. Kitiashvili, and R. Angryk, “Developing machine learning models of subgrid turbulent transport for quiet sun 3d radiative hydrodynamic simulations,” SSRN Preprint No. 5236395, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5236395 [4] I. N. Kitiashvili, S. Couvidat, and A. Lagg, “Using Realistic MHD Simu-lations for Modeling and Interpretation of Quiet-Sun Observations with the Solar Dynamics Observatory Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager,” 

The Astrophysical Journal , vol. 808, no. 1, p. 59, Jul. 2015. 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 

log 10 |Predicted| - log 10 |Target| 

> 0.00
> 0.25
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00
> 1.25
> 1.50
> 1.75
> 2.00
> Normalized Frequency Density
> vv

(cm 2/s2)

> Smagorinsky Gradient CNN ClCNN

(a) 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 

log 10 |Predicted| - log 10 |Target| 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Normalized Frequency Density
> uw

(cm 2/s2) 

> Smagorinsky Gradient CNN ClCNN

(b) Fig. 6. Histogram of absolute prediction errors for τvv (a) and τuw (b). The cluster-weighted CNN (green) consistently reduces large error occurrences and tightens the error spread compared to the uniform-loss CNN (orange). 

(a) (b) Fig. 7. Comparison of the predictions by the cluster-weighted CNN and the baseline CNN with the actual values of τvv (a) and τuw (b). [5] A. A. Wray, K. Bensassi, I. N. Kitiashvili, N. N. Mansour, and A. G. Kosovichev, “Simulations of Stellar Magnetoconvection using the Radiative MHD Code ‘StellarBox’,” arXiv e-prints , p. arXiv:1507.07999, Jul. 2015. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10. 48550/arXiv.1507.07999 [6] A. A. Wray, K. Bensassiy, I. N. Kitiashvili, N. N. Mansour, and A. G. Kosovichev, “Realistic Simulations of Stellar Radiative MHD,” in Variability of the Sun and Sun-Like Stars: from Asteroseismology to Space Weather , J. P. Rozelot and E. S. Babayev, Eds., 2018, p. 39. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-77199-1 4 [7] A. Nordlund, “Solar Convection,” Solar Physics , vol. 100, p. 209, Oct. 1985. (a) (b) Fig. 8. Cluster-wise median relative improvement of MSE (a) and relative improvements as a function of height (b) across all τ .[8] I. N. Kitiashvili and A. A. Wray, “Revisiting turbulent properties of solar convection with 3D radiative hydrodynamic modeling,” arXiv e-prints ,p. arXiv:2502.00974, Feb. 2025. [9] J. Smagorinsky, “General Circulation Experiments with the Primitive Equations,” Monthly Weather Review , vol. 91, no. 3, p. 99, Jan. 1963. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0493(1963)091 ⟨0099: GCEWTP ⟩2.3.CO;2 [10] M. Germano, U. Piomelli, P. Moin, and W. H. Cabot, “A dynamic subgrid-scale eddy viscosity model,” Physics of Fluids A, vol. 3, no. 7, pp. 1760–1765, Jul. 1991. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.857955 [11] J. Ling, A. Kurzawski, and J. Templeton, “Reynolds averaged turbulence modelling using deep neural networks with embedded invariance,” 

Journal of Fluid Mechanics , vol. 807, pp. 155–166, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2016.615 [12] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations,” 

Journal of Computational Physics , vol. 378, pp. 686–707, 2019. [13] M. Waidele, J. Zhao, and I. N. Kitiashvili, “Nonzero Phase Shifts of Acoustic Waves in the Lower Solar Atmosphere Measured from Realistic Simulations and Their Role in Local Helioseismology,” The Astrophysical Journal , vol. 949, no. 2, p. 99, Jun. 2023. [14] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.5555/1953048.2078195 [15] A. K. Jain, “Data clustering: 50 years beyond k-means,” Pattern Recog-nition Letters , vol. 31, no. 8, pp. 651–666, 2010. [16] P. J. Rousseeuw, “Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of cluster analysis,” Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics , vol. 20, pp. 53–65, 1987. [17] D. Arthur and S. Vassilvitskii, “k-means++: The advantages of careful seeding,” in Proceedings of the eighteenth annual ACM-SIAM sym-posium on Discrete algorithms . Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2007, pp. 1027–1035. [18] M. Rempel, “Small-scale Dynamo Simulations: Magnetic Field Am-plification in Exploding Granules and the Role of Deep and Shallow Recirculation,” The Astrophysical Journal , vol. 859, no. 2, p. 161, Jun. 2018.