Title: 2606.25417v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.25417v1

Published Time: Thu, 25 Jun 2026 00:32:26 GMT

Number of Pages: 37

Markdown Content:
OFFICIAL 

OFFICIAL 

# Evaluation of medium range machine learning 

# models for sub -seasonal prediction 

Cat herine de Burgh -Day 1*, Chen Li 1, Deb ra Hudson 1, Li Shi 1, Harrison Cook 2^, Robin Wedd 1,

Griffith Young 1

> 1

Australian Bureau of Meteorology 700 Collins Street, Docklands VIC 3008, Australia 

> 2

European Centre for Medium -Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) 

> ^

Employed by the Bureau of Meteorology at the time this work was done 

Corresponding Author: catherine.deburgh -day@bom.gov.au 

Keywords: S2S, machine learning, GraphCast, FourCastNet, ACCESS -S, GC5 

# Abstract 

The performance of t wo machine learning (ML) atmosphere models - GraphCast and FourCastNetV2 - is 

evaluated in the context of sub -seasonal prediction , including their ability to represent key climate drivers 

of variability, namely the Madden -Julian Oscillation and the Southern Annular Mode. Model skill is 

assessed over both a 38 -year hindcast period and a 2.5 -year hindcast period. The longer period overlaps 

with the training windows of the ML models but provides a larger sample for robust evaluation , while the 

shorter period is independent of the ML model training period . This dual evaluation illustrates a 

compromise approach to the problem of insufficient independent data for evaluation of the models for 

sub -seasonal prediction . The ML mode ls are compared against the Bureau of Meteorology's physics -

based seasonal prediction system, ACCESS -S2, for the 38 -year period , and a more recent physics -based 

coupled model for the shorter hindcast period. Across the two evaluation periods, both ML models have 

surprisingly good skill for sub -seasonal timescales, given they were designed for forecasting on medium 

range timescales . In general, t he ML models are as skilful as the physical model ensemble mean at shorter 

lead times and comparable to the physical model ensemble member s at longer lead times. OFFICIAL 

> OFFICIAL

# 1 Introduction 

The science of sub -seasonal prediction has grown rapidly over the last decade (e.g., Robertson and Vitart 

2019, Domeisen et al. 2022 ) and forecasts from operational centres are now commonplace. Forecasts of 

weather and climate on sub -seasonal timescales are highly beneficial to a variety of stakeholders, and are 

increasingly being used for decision -making ( e.g., White et al. 2022 ). The Australian Bureau of 

Meteorology has been providing sub -seasonal forecasts to the public since August 2019 using ACCESS -S

(Australian Community Climate and Earth System Simulator –Seasonal; Hudson et al., 2017; Wedd et al., 

2022). 

These operational sub -seasonal forecasts currently use traditional physics -based models. However, the 

field of data -driven weather and climate forecasting is advancing rapidly. Several operational centres are 

now developing, evaluating and operationalisin g machine learning (ML) models and exploring their 

strengths and weaknesses compared to physics -based models. There are still several key questions and 

active research around aspects such as the physical consistency of ML -generated forecasts (e.g., Bonavita ,

2023 ; Hakim & Masanam , 2024) , appropriate ensemble generation (e.g., Lang et al. 2024b; Price et al. 

202 5; Liu et al., 2025 ), stability for forecasts beyond ~14 -days (e.g., Galluser et al. 2025), skill and use in 

an operational -like context (e.g., Ben Bouallègue et al., 2024 ; DeMaria et al., 2025; Harrison et al., 2025 ), 

skill across a range of meteorological phenomena and for predictions of extremes (e.g. Charlton -Perez et 

al. 2024; Sun et al, 2025; Sahu et al, 2025; Mor isseau et al. 2025 ), and fairness in ML model development 

and training ( Olivetti & Messori, 2025) .

Most of the focus of these efforts ha s been on short - to medium -range forecasts (0 -10 days) (e.g., Pathak 

et al., 2022; Lam et al, 2023; Bi et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Lang et al., 2024 a; Alet et al., 2025; 

Dunstan et al., 2025; Xiong et al., 2025 ). However, the research and development on ML models for sub -

seasonal and seasonal prediction is growing (e.g., Chen et al. 2024; Lang et al., 2024b; Kent et al. 2025 ;

Bonev et al., 2025 ; Antonio et al. 2025 ). One of the major benefits of ML models is that they are orders of 

magnitude computationally cheaper and faster to run than our traditional models. Using ML models for 

sub -seasonal and seasonal prediction would significantly reduce the large computationa l burden and time 

taken to produce hindcasts. It also opens other possibilities, including higher resolution forecasts, the 

production of larger ensembles and more frequent system upgrades. 

In this paper, the performance of two machine learning models - GraphCast (Lam et al., 2023) and 

FourCastNetV2 (Bonev et al., 2023, July) - is evaluated for sub -seasonal climate prediction, including a

focus on key climate drivers such as the Madden -Julian Oscillation (MJO) and the Southern Annular 

Mode (SAM), which significantly influence sub -seasonal variability over Australia. OFFICIAL 

> OFFICIAL

These two ML models are trained on 6-hourly data representing the three -dimensional state of the 

atmosphere , derived from reanalysis and analys is datasets such as ERA5 (Hersbach et al., 2020). Through 

this training, the models learn how the atmospheric state evolves over time and how different variables 

are related to each other . When run in forecast mode, they predict the atmospheric state 6 hours ahead, 

then use that prediction as input to forecast the next 6 hours, and so on. This auto -regressive approach 

means the model relies on its own previous outputs to generate future pr edictions. Note that this method 

does not necessarily guarantee a realistic or stable climate, as the focus is on short -term atmospheric 

evolution rather than capturing broader climate patterns or the conservation of key quantities . It is also 

fundamentally different from predicting a climate index like Niño3, which targets a specific large -scale 

index of variability rather than the full atmospheric state. 

Because ML weather and climate models are trained on a large proportion of the high -quality historical 

reanalysis period, a limited sample remains for independent evaluation. For example, GraphCast was 

trained on data from 1979 to 2021 (Lam et al., 2023 ), leaving only a few years of recent data for 

independent evaluation. While this is sufficient for evaluating weather phenomena, it becomes limiting 

when analysing longer timescale processes , and when evaluating climate drivers or extremes. As such, 

two evaluation periods are used in this study . The first involves benchmark ing GraphCast and 

FourCastNetV2 against the Bureau of Meteorology’s seasonal prediction system, ACCESS -S2 (Wedd et 

al, 2022) , using a 38 -year hindcast period from 1981 to 2018. Although this period provides a substantial 

dataset for analysis, it overlaps with the training data of both ML models . Therefore, a second, 

independent evaluation period from January 2022 to June 2024 is introduced , which falls outside the 

training window s. For this shorter period, we compare the ML models to forecasts from the UK Met 

Office’s more recent global coupled model configuration , GC5 (Global Coupled Model version 5) (note 

that ACCESS -S2 uses an older coupled model, GC2) . GC5 is being tested at the Bureau over this recent 

period. GC5 was not used for the longer evaluation due to the impracticality of generating a comparable 

hindcast dataset given resource constraints. 

By evaluating GraphCast and FourCastNetV2 across both periods, we obtain a robust sample from the 

38 -year hindcast and an independent evaluation from the 2.5 -year period. Consistent performance across 

these two windows enhances confidence in our results. However, it is important to acknowledge that there 

are several limitations of this approach. Since t he 38 -year evaluation period overlaps with the training 

data, it likely lead s to an optimistic estimate of the ML model skill. Meanwhile, the shorter 2.5 -year 

period, while independent, includes a very limited number of relevant events , such as MJO occurrences 

and SAM phase transitions , and does not support the calculation of anomalies relative to its own OFFICIAL 

> OFFICIAL

climatology (due to insufficient samples to compute a robust climatology ). As such, this compr omise 

should not be viewed as a substitute for a large r, fully independent evaluation dataset in future work .

Our choice of ML models is motivated by their different architectures and each of them being likely to be 

well suited to the task of sub -seasonal prediction . GraphCast has a graph -based architecture and is popular 

for medium range forecasts because it shows higher skill than many competitors (Rasp et al., 2024 ),

which may extend into longer range forecasts . FourCastNetV2 uses a Spherical Fourier Neural Operator 

architecture and is popular for applications aiming for long -term stability and lower growth of biases 

(e.g., Watt -Meyer et al., 2023; Guan et al., 2024 ). It is important to emphasise , however , that neither of 

these models is designed for sub -seasonal prediction and would not typically be considered suitable for 

applications at these timescales without further adaptation . This assessment therefore represents a

preliminary investigation into the potential of ML atmospheric models for sub -seasonal prediction .

Another limitation of the current study is the absence of ensemble forecasts for the ML models , which is 

essential for operational applications of sub -seasonal predict ion . The generation of ensembles by 

perturb ing initial conditions for ML models designed as single member systems , such as GraphCast and 

FourCastNetV2, has yielded mixed res ults (Weyn et al., 2021; Mahesh et al ., 2024 ; Brenowitz et al., 

2025 ; Liu et a., 2025 ). As such , it is preferable to generate ensembles us ing ML model s designed 

specifically for generating ensembles (e.g. Lang et al., 2024; Price et al., 2025 ), which were not openly 

available when this study was initiated . Given these challenges, this study should be viewed as a 

contribution to initial exploration s into the potential of machine learning -based atmospheric models for 

sub -seasonal prediction , alongside related work such as Diao & Barnes (2025). It aims to inform and 

guide future research by highlighting key limitations, methodological considerations, and opportunities 

for advancing the development and evaluation of such models. 

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, the data and methods are described; in 

Section 3 the results of the evaluation across the 38 -year and 2.5 -year period s are presented; in Section 4 

a discussion of these results is provided; and conclusions are given in Section 5. 

# 2 Data and methods 

# 2.1 Reanalysis Data 

The ML and physical models are evaluated against the ERA5 reanalysis dataset (Hersbach et al., 2020). 

ERA5 is based on the ECMWF Integrated Forecasting System, has a horizontal resolution of ~31 km, 137 

vertical levels, and hourly output. Since the ML models are trained on ERA5, it is valuable to also assess 

their performance against alternative reanalysis datasets. We therefore conducted an additional evaluation OFFICIAL 

> OFFICIAL

using the NCEP/NCAR reanalysis for all MJO and SAM related analyses, which yielded results 

consistent with those obtained from ERA5. For brevity, we present only the results against ERA5. 

The reanalysis datasets were mapped to the resolution s of ACCESS -S2 and GC5 (both described below) 

using bilinear interpolation for the evaluations over the 38 -year and 2.5 -year periods , respectively .

# 2.2 The ACCESS -S2 model 

ACCESS -S2 (Australian Community Climate and Earth -System Simulator - Seasonal, version 2) has 

been the Bureau’s seasonal prediction system since October 2021 (Wedd et al ., 2022). ACCESS -S2 uses 

the Met Office global coupled model version 2 (GC2) at N216 resolution (~60km) and 85 levels in the 

atmosphere, 0.25° resolution and 75 vertical levels in the ocean, four land surface layers and five sea -ice 

thickness categories. Details of the data assimilation and ensemble generation can be found in Wedd et al 

(2022). The ACCESS -S2 data used in this study are 9-member ensembles from the hindcast set , with 

en semble member 0 being the unperturbed central member .

# 2.3 Global coupled model version 5 (GC5) 

Global Coupled model version 5 (GC5) i s the latest GC model release from the Met Office . It is 

compri sed of the Global At mosphere and Land configuration GAL 9.0 - based on the Unified Model (UM) 

version 12.2 and the Joint UK Land Environment Simulator (JULES) version 6.3 ; and the Global Ocean 

and Sea Ice configuration GOS I9.0 , which includes the Nucleus for European Modelling of the Ocean 

(NEMO) version 4.0 and the Sea Ice modelling Integrated Initiative (SI 3) version 4.0 (Xa vier et al. in 

preparation ).

GC5 wa s run with an N320 resolution (~40km at the equator) for the atmosphere -land and 0.25 degrees 

for the ocean -ice. A 9 -member ensemble was used for the experiments , using pre -perturbed Met Office 

Global Ensemble Prediction System ( MOGREPS ) (Bowler et al , 2008 ) initial conditions obtained from 

the Met Office . The central member has no stochastic physics perturbations, while the remaining 

members have these perturbations turned on for the forecast integration .

# 2.4 Machine learning models 

GraphCast (Lam et al., 2023) is a deep learning model for the atmosphere, developed by Google 

Deepmind , which uses a graph -based neural network architecture. Three configurations of the model have 

been trained and made publicly available ( https://github.com/google -deepmind/graphcast ). For this work, 

the "GraphCast_operational " version is used. This version has 0.25 -degree resolution, a 6 -hour timestep, 13 

pressure levels in the atmosphere, and is trained on ERA5 reanalysis (Hersbach et al., 2020) data from 

1979 to 2017 before being fine -tuned on ECMWF IFS -HRES data from 2016 to 2021. OFFICIAL 

> OFFICIAL

FourCastNetV2 (Bonev et al., 2023, July) is a successor to FourCastNet (Pathak et al., 2022) and is also a

deep learning model for the atmosphere. FourCastNetV2 innovated on the original by moving from a 

Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) model with a Vision Transformer (ViT) backbone to a Spherical Fourier 

Neural Operator (SFNO) -based model. This involved reform ulating the FNO architecture to a spherical 

geometry (i.e., SFNO), and removing the ViT backbone to substitute patch embedding with down -

sampling in the initial SFNO layer of the model to save memory. Unlike FNOs, SFNO -based 

architectures respect spherical symmetry by construction, leading to improved stability when simulating 

the atmosphere or other natively -spherical systems. FourCastNetV2 is trained on ERA5 data from 1979 to 

2015 with a timestep of 6 -hours, 0.25 -degree resolution and 13 pressure levels in the atmosphere. 

In this study, b oth GraphCast and FourCastNetV2 forecasts were initialised with ERA5 reanalysis data, 

and produce d outputs on the ERA5 grid. Like the reanalysis data, t he se outputs were then mapped to the 

ACCESS -S2 and GC5 model grids using bilinear interpolation for the evaluations .

# 2.5 Experiment design and methods 

As described in the Introduction, two evaluation period s were used in this study – a longer 38 -year perio d

which overlaps with the GraphCast and FourCastNetV2 training windows, and a smaller 2.5 -year period 

which is independent. The ML model forecasts were run with an autoregressive timestep of 6 hours, 

starting from 00Z on the 1st and 16 th of each month in the 2.5 -year hindcast , and from 00Z on the 1st of 

each month in the 38 -year hindcast. 

The GC5 model wa s run over the 2.5 -year hindcast period only, with the same lead time and start date -

time configuration as the ML models. ACCESS -S2 hindcast data were used for comparison with the ML 

models from the 1 st of each month of the full 38 year hindcast. A summary of the details of the hindcasts 

used in this analysis are presented in Table 1.

# 3 Results 

# 3.1 The 38 -year hindcast period 

A detailed evaluation was undertaken using the 38 -year hindcast period for FourCastNetV2, GraphCast, 

and ACCESS -S2 . Consistent with standard practice in sub -seasonal prediction (e.g., Hudson et al. 2017; 

Wedd et al. 2022) , the evaluation is focussed on the skill of predicted anomalies . Evaluation of anomalies 

enables assessment of skill beyond variations in climatology. Anomalies are calculated relative to the 

lead -time dependent hindcast climatolo gy of each model respectively. For the ACCESS -S2 ensemble 

members, the ensemble mean climatology is used. OFFICIAL 

> OFFICIAL

Table 1: Summary of the two hindcast periods 

Name  Period  Starts 

(per month) 

Total number of 

forecast cases 

Models 

2.5 -year 

hindcast 

Jan 2022 –

Jun 2024 

00Z 1 st and 16 th  60  • GraphCast 

• FourCastNetV2 

• GC5 9 -member ensemble 

38 -year 

hindcast 

Jan 1981 –

Dec 2018 

00Z 1 st  456  • GraphCast 

• FourCastNetV2 

• ACCESS -S2 9 -member ensemble (taken 

from existing hindcast set) 

3.1.1 Weekly skill 

Globally -averaged w eekly mean correlation skill of 10m u -wind speed, 850 hPa temperature, mean sea 

level pressure, and rainfall anomalies for weeks 1 to 4 are presented in Figure 1. Correlation s are 

calculated using the  latitude -weighted Pearson’s correlation coefficient.  Note that rainfall is not included 

as a variable in FourCastNetV2 , therefore all rainfall evaluation is limited to GraphCast .

For all variables in week 1 , the ML models have slightly higher skill than ACCESS -S2 . This is not 

surprising since these models have been designed for weather forecasting, whereas the focus of ACCESS -

S2 is for sub -seasonal and seasonal prediction . For weeks 3 and 4 the ML models show similar skill to 

that of a single member of ACCESS -S2. In contrast , the ACCESS -S2 ensemble mean has the highest skill 

in weeks 3 and 4. This raises the question of how competitive an appropriate ly designed ML model 

ensemble could be , and to what extent ensemble design and choice of perturbation scheme would 

influence its performance . This is demonstrated by Lang et al. (2024) , who adopt a n ensemble -based 

training method with a Continuous Ranked Probability Score ( CRPS ) loss function for their ensemble ML 

model , AIFS -CRPS , which  outperforms the uncalibrated physical model ensemble .

Maps of  weekly correlation skills of screen -level temperature anomalies for week s 1 and 3 are shown in 

Figure 2. The map for ACCESS -S2 shows the correlation skill of a single ensemble member rather than 

the ensemble mean. The spatial pattern of skill in week 1 is broadly consistent across the models and 

aligns with expect ations (e.g., Zhu et al 2014) . Skill is highest in the extratropics, due to the greater 

predictability of baroclinic systems, and lowest in the tropics except for a region of high skill in the 

equatorial eastern Pacific which is linked to the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) . In general, b oth OFFICIAL   

> OFFICIAL
> Figure 1: Globally averaged correlation skills of (a) 10m u -wind speed, (b) 850 hPa temperature, (c) mean sea level
> pressure, and (d) rainfall for lead weeks 1 to 4 for the 38 -year hindcast. Yellow, red, dark blue and light blue bars
> show the correlations for GraphCast, FourCastNetV2, the 9 -member ACCESS -S2 ensemble mean and a single
> mem ber of ACCESS -S2 respectively. These correlation skills are computed based on weekly anomalies relative to
> each model’s own climatology for the period 1981 –2018, considering all forecast start dates within this time
> period.

ML models show higher skill at week 1 than ACCESS -S2, particularly over sub -tropical land and high 

latitudes. Interestingly, FourCastNetV2 is significantly more skillful than ACCESS -S2 and GraphCast 

over the equatorial western Pacific and Indian Ocean regions , including the Maritime Continent. In week 

3 extratropical skill has dropped compared to week 1 and most of the predictability lies in the tropics and 

over the oceans . The ML models show similar patterns and regions of skill to ACCESS -S2, but overall 

perform less well , including in the high skill region of the eastern equatorial Pacific. At this longer lead 

time, the inclusion of an ocean model in ACCESS -S is probably contributing to the skill through the 

representation of lower -frequency ocean and coupled processes. In contrast, whil e the ML models use 

surface temperature as a predictor, they do not include any sub -surface ocean information. OFFICIAL     

> OFFICIAL
> Figure 2: The upper -row figures illustrate the anomaly correlation skills of weekly temperature at 1.5m at lead time
> week 1 across the 38 -year hindcast period for: a single ACCESS -S2 ensemble member (a), GraphCast (b),
> and FourCastNetV2 (c). The bottom -row figures (d –f) represent the same variables as the upper row but at lead
> time week 3. These correlation skills are computed based on weekly anomalies relative to each model’s own
> climatology for the period 1981 –2018, considering all forecast start dates wi thin this time period.

Similar results are found for rainfall , in that GraphCast out -performs ACCESS -S2 in week 1 but is not as 

skilful in week 3 (Figure 3). Encouraging ly, the regions of skill for GraphCast generally align well with 

those of ACCESS -S2 .

3.1.2 The MJO 

The MJO is an eastward -propagating mode of tropical tropospheric variability characterised by large 

scale convective and circulation anomalies typically recurring every 30 -60 days. It is the dominant mode 

of tropical variability and predictability on sub -seasonal timescales , with impacts extending away from 

the tropics including over Australia, where rainfall anomalies are closely linked to the MJO’s phase (e.g. 

Wheeler et al., 2009; Marshall & Hendon, 2019). While the MJO has a n estimated intrinsic predictability 

of around 5 -7 weeks, the current generation of physical models are able to skilfully predict the MJO up to 

20 -45 days in advance depending on season and phase (e.g., Ding & Seo, 2010; Neena et al. 2014 ; Jiang 

et al. 2020 ). 

The MJO is typically measured using the bivariate Real -time Multivariate MJO (RMM) index (Wheeler 

and Hendon 2004). The RMM index is calculated from a combined empirical orthogonal function (EOF) 

analysis of 15 °S–15 °N-averaged outgoing longwave radiation (OLR) and 850 - and 200 -hPa zonal wind 

anomalies. However, s ince neither GraphCast nor FourCastNetV2 produce OLR , a wind -only version of 

the index is used here , whereby only two variables (850 - and 200 -hPa u -wind) are projected onto the OFFICIAL 

> OFFICIAL
> Figure 3: As in Figure 2 except for precipitation.

standard observation -based EOFs instead of three. This approach has been used in other studies 

examining the MJO in ML models which do not provide OLR (e.g., Lang et al., 2024). 

Two MJO cases in the 38 -year hindcast period are presented in Figure 4, with initialisation dates of the 1st 

March 2012 and the 1 st Fe bruary 2017, and prediction lead -times of 28 days. The vertical black line on 

each Hovm öller marks 150 ˚ E, indicating the eastern edge of the Maritime Continent region. For the 2012 

case, t he MJO phase diagram and the 850 hPa u -wind anomaly Hovm öllers show that the MJO was in 

phase 3 (i.e. , eastern Indian Ocean) at the start of the forecast and remained active as it propagated across 

the Maritime Con tinent , eventually weaken ing over the western Pacific . ACCESS -S2 (both the ensemble 

mean and the central member) and FourCastNetV2 represented the magnitude and speed of the event well 

to approximately lead day 17, after which they failed to capture the strengthening of the event seen in 

ERA5. In contrast, GraphCast struggled to capture th e event, propagati ng slowly and becoming inactive 

over the Maritime Continent . The 2017 event started in phase 4 (i.e. , over the Maritime Continent ) and 

then intensified, remaining active throughout the entire four -week period . In general, all the models 

under -estimated the amplitude of the MJO over the first two weeks of the forecast. In this OFFICIAL 

OFFICIAL 

Figure 4: The phase diagram (top row) for two MJO events, beginning from the 1st of March 2012 (left column) and 

the 1st of February 2017 (right column), and the corresponding U850 anomalies evolution for each event in 

(from top to bottom) ERA5, the ACCESS -S2 ensemble mean, one ACCESS -S2 ensemble member, GraphCast, and 

FourCastNetV2. OFFICIAL 

> OFFICIAL

case, in contrast to the 2012 case, GraphCast performed relatively better than the other models. Analysis 

of the se two MJO cases suggests that the ML models can effectively reproduce MJO structure and 

propagation . Their outputs resemble those of ACCESS -S2 (or any other physical model) such that, 

without prior knowledge, one might easily mistake them for traditional physical models .

MJO skill across all forecast start -dates in the 38 -year period are shown in Figure 5. Skill is calculated as 

the bivariate correlation of the RMM1 and RMM2 indices, and the root -mean -squared -error ( RMSE ) of 

the magnitude of the combined RMM index , respectively. At shorter lead -times ( <15 days) 

FourCastNetV2 has the highest skill, after which the most skilful model is the ACCESS -S2 ensemble 

mean. FourCastNetV2 is , however , more skilful than individual ACCESS -S2 ensemble members in terms 

of correlation and RMSE out to 30 -day s lead -time . GraphCast has similar correlation and RMSE 

performance to the ACCESS -S2 ensemble mean in the first two week s. At longer lead times , out to 25 0-

days, it is still competitive with individual ACCESS -S2 members in terms of correlation, but has a higher 

RMSE . Figure 6 shows the average MJO amplitude with lead time , where it can be seen that Graphcast 

significantly overestimate s the MJO signal beyond 2 weeks , while ACCESS -S2 and FourCastNetV2 are 

more similar and both slightly underestimate it relative to ERA5 . Interestingly, GraphCast shows larger 

U-850 hPa wind biases over the tropical Indian Ocean and Maritime Continent region than 

FourCastNetV2 and ACCESS -S2 after the first week of the forecast (Figure 7), which is probably related 

to the somewhat poorer MJO skill and overestimated MJO magnitude in GraphCast at longer leads .

To evaluate the ability of each model to capture the magnitude and phase speed of MJO events as they 

move over the Maritime C ontinent - which is often a cha llenge for physical models - composite phase 

diagrams were constructed for all events in the 38 year hindcast period that were active for more than 14 

days and that start ed in phases 1, 2 and 3 respectively (Figure 8 left column ). To compl ement the se , plots 

of the mean composite phase location as a function of lead -time were produced (Figure 8 right column ),

providing a measure of the propagation speed of the MJO for a given starting phase, relative to that in 

ERA5. If a m odel has a composite phase propagation line that is steeper than that of ERA5 , then the MJO 

is propagating too quickly, whereas if it is shallower , the MJO is propagating too slowly. In general ,

ACCESS -S2 and FourCastNetV2 perform better in capturing MJO amplitude compared to GraphCast ,

with their composite trajectories closely matching the reanalysis. In contrast, certain individual MJO 

events from GraphCast produced anomalously large amplitudes that exceeded the ERA5 envelope, 

contributing to the elevated RMSE and amplitude observed in Fig ures 5 and 6. Additionally, the 

composite MJO propagation speed in GraphCast was systematically slower across all initial phases 1-3

after about 14 days and deteriorated further with increasing lead -time . ACCESS -S2 showed good 

composite MJO propagation speed in phases 1 and 3, but propagated too slowly in phase 2 from around OFFICIAL 

OFFICIAL 

Figure 5: MJO anomaly correlation (left) and RMSE (right) skill for all months in all years from 1981 to 2018 for 

ACCESS -S2 ensemble members (dotted blue), the ACCESS -S2 ensemble mean (solid blue), GraphCast (yellow) and 

FourCastNetV2 (red). 

Figure 6: Average MJO amplitude with lead time for all months in all years from 1981 to 2018 for 

ACCESS -S2 ensemble members (dotted blue), GraphCast (dashed yellow) and FourCastNetV2 (dashed red). The 

solid blue line shows the average of the amplitudes of the ACCESS -S2 ensemble members, not the amplitude of the 

ACCESS -S2 ensemble mean. The black line is the average MJO amplitude for ERA5 for all months in all years from 

1981 to 2018, matched to each forecast lead time. OFFICIAL  

> OFFICIAL
> Figure 7: Weekly -average 850 hPa annual mean wind biases relative to ERA5 across the 38 -year hindcast period for
> (a) GraphCast, (b) FourCastNetV2, (c) one ACCESS -S2 ensemble member, and (d) the ACCESS -S2 ensemble mean, at
> lead week 3. The biases are calculated by computing weekly means fo r each lead time, followed by annual means
> across model runs, and then subtracting from the equivalent from ERA5, before averaging the difference across the
> 38 -year hindcast period.

15 days . FourCastNetV2 matched the phase speed of ERA5 best in phases 2 a nd 3 for all lead times , and 

also did so phase 1 to about 20 days, after which it was too slow (Figure 8 right column ). Interestingly, 

while FourCastNetV2 had the best overall performance in terms of composite phase speed, it tended to 

underpredict the number of MJO events, with fewer than the number identified in ERA5 in the 38 -year 

hindcast period for all three phases examined. In contrast, GraphCast had a tendency to overpredict the 

number of events in all phases , while ACCESS -S2 had too few events in phase 1, and too many in phase 

3. 

Finally, the MJO plays a critical role in modulating rainfall across the tropical Indo -Pacific , and the ability 

of a model to capture the associated rainfall pattern s is essential for skilful sub -seasonal rainfall 

prediction . Figure 9 shows the composites of daily rainfall anomalies associated with each MJO phase .

For ERA5 , the composites are based on all days in November to March (NDJFM) across the 38 -year 

period. For the models, they represent the relatio nship during the first (top row) and third weeks (bottom 

row) of the forecast , using NDJFM initialisation dates from the hindcast . The se composite s reflect the 

coincident relationship between the model's forecasted MJO phase on a given day and the corresponding OFFICIAL 

OFFICIAL 

Figure 8: Left column: Phase diagrams for all MJO events in the 38 -year hindcast period active for more than 14 

days starting in phase 1 (top), phase 2 (middle) and phase 3 (bottom) for ACCESS -S2 (blue), GraphCast (yellow), 

FourCastNetV2 (red), and ERA5 (b lack). The dashed lines show individual MJO events, and the solid lines show the 

composite of all events. Right column: Composite phase speed plots for all MJO events in the 38 -year hindcast 

period active for more than 14 days starting in phase 1 (top), ph ase 2 (middle) and phase 3 (bottom) for ACCESS -S2 

(blue), GraphCast (yellow), FourCastNetV2 (red), and ERA5 (black). On this plot, a faster propagating MJO event has 

a steeper slope, and a slower event has a shallower slope. Open circles indicate a composi te amplitude that is weak OFFICIAL 

OFFICIAL 

(less than 1) while solid circles indicate a composite amplitude greater than 1. The number of cases contributing to 

the figure for each dataset is indicated in the legend of the right column plots. 

Figure 9: Rainfall composite maps for MJO events in NDJFM across the 38 -year hindcast period, for all MJO phases, 

for ERA5 (top), one ACCESS -S2 ensemble member at lead week 1 (days 1 -7) (middle left), GraphCast at lead week 1 

(days 1 -7) (middle right), one ACCESS -S2 ensemble member at lead week 3 (days 15 -21) (bottom left)), and 

GraphCast at lead week 3 (days 15 -21) (bottom right). The composites were constructed using rainfall data from 

periods where the MJO was active in that dataset (as opposed to using periods where the MJO was active in ERA5 

for all composites). The number of cases with an active MJO contributing to each composite are indicated by the 

number in the upper right of each map. OFFICIAL 

> OFFICIAL

rainfall i.e., it is not measuring forecast skill. Comparing the top and bottom panels reveals whether the 

models’ ability to reproduce the rainfall patterns varies with forecast lead time . This analysis is 

particularly insightful for the ML model, as it helps assess its "physicality" - not only because the MJO 

index is derived from wind fields and not rainfall , but also because it evaluates the model’s ability to 

reproduce large -scale, phase -dependent rainfall patterns rather than just grid -point level accuracy. 

The rainfall composites show that for week 1 , both Gra phCast and ACCESS -S2 perform well in capturing 

both the spatial pattern and magnitude of rainfall anomalies associated with each MJO phase . By week 3, 

ACCESS -S2 continues to represent the spatial pattern with similar fidelity to week 1. In contrast , while 

GraphCast still captures the spatial pattern of the anomalies reasonably well , the magnitude of the 

response is too strong. One possible explanation could be related to the tendency of GraphCast (and other 

ML models trained against a mean squared error loss ) to produce blur ry output s as lead -time increases 

(e.g. as shown in Husain et al., 2025) , effectively removing smaller scale variability . This smoothing 

could suppress noise and inadvertently amplify coherent signals, leading to an over -emphasised MJO .

3.1.3 The SAM 

The SAM is the leading mode of atmospheric variability in the Southern Hemisphere extratropics. It is 

characterised by meridional shifts in the strength of the zonal flow between about 55° –60°S and 35° –

40°S . The p ositive phase of the SAM is associated with decreased geopotential height over Antarctica, 

increased geopotential height over the mid -latitudes and a poleward shift of the midlatitude westerly wind 

belt . Conversely, the negative phase of the SAM is associated with increased geopotential height over 

Antarctica, decreased geopotential height over the mid -latitudes and an equatorward shift of the 

midlatitude westerly wind belt (e.g. , Thompson and Wallace 2000; Gillett et al. 2006). For Australia, t he 

influence of SAM on rainfall and temperature is seasonally dependant . During austral winter, the positive 

phase of SAM is associated with decreased daily rainfall over southeast (i.e. V ictoria and Tasmania 

regions) and southwest Australia. In contrast, during austral summer, the positive phase of SAM tends to 

enhance rainfall and decrease the incidence of extreme heat events along the southeastern coast of 

Australia (e.g. Hendon et al. 2007b). Current state -of -the -art physical prediction systems demonstrate skill 

in forecasting the daily SAM index out to about 14 days (e.g. Marshall et al. 2012; Wedd et al. 2022). 

In order to assess the broad -scale depiction of the SAM in the models , and its representation with lead -

time, the leading EOF of weekly -me an zonal -mean sea level pressure (SLP) between 25 ° and 75 °S is 

calculated for ERA5 and each of the models over the period 1981 -2018 , following the method ology 

outlined in Marshall et al. (2012 ; Section 3.1) . Figure 10 shows the first EOF for ERA5 , as well as for 

lead weeks 1 and 3 from ACCESS -S2, FourCastNetV2 and GraphCast. The EOF 1 pattern from all models 

closely resembles that of ERA5 , account ing for about ~14% of the variability in weekly mean SLP. The OFFICIAL          

> OFFICIAL
> Figure 10: SAM patterns, here defined as the first EOF of the weekly mean (lead days 1 -7 for week 1, lead days 15 -
> 21 for week 3) of the mean sea level pressure, for (a) ERA5, (b) ACCESS -S2 single ensemble member lead week 1,
> (c) GraphCast lead week 1, (d) FourCastNet V2 lead week 1, (e) ACCESS -S2 single ensemble member lead week 3,
> (f) GraphCast lead week 3, and (g) FourCastNet V2 lead week 3. Weekly means are used to compute the EOF
> instead of the more common monthly mean because the forecast models have lead times shorter than a full
> month, making monthly means impossible. The EOF patterns from the weekly means are very similar to those
> obtained by using the monthly mean.

SAM structure remains broadly consistent between week 1 and week 3 for all models , although 

GraphCast shows a slightly enhanced loading east of New Zealand at week 3 .

To evaluate the skill in forecasting the daily SAM index , daily mean predicted SLP anomalies are 

projected onto the observed ( ERA5 ) EOF , rather than using each model 's own EOF . Specifically, t he 

anomalies are projected onto the first EOF of ERA5 monthly mean SLP between 25° and 75°S , and then 

normalised by the standard deviation of the observed (ERA5) monthly SAM index (see Marshall et al. 

2012 for details) . The correlation and RMSE for forecasts of the daily SAM index are shown in Figure 11 .

The two ML models exhibit comparable skill in predicting the SAM index . At shorter lead -times (up to 

~10 days), they perform slightly better than the ACCESS -S2 ensemble mean and outperform individual 

ACCESS -S2 ensemble members . At longer lead -times , the ensemble mean of ACCESS -S2 de monstrates 

superior skill; however , both GraphCast and Four CastNetV2 are similar to , if not a bit better than ,

individual ACCESS -S2 ensemble members. This highlights the possibility that an ensemble ML model 

may surpass the skill of the ACCESS -S2 ensemble mean at longer lead -times .OFFICIAL    

> OFFICIAL
> Figure 11: Daily SAM index anomaly correlation (left) and RMSE (right) skill for all months in all years from 1981 to
> 2018 for ACCESS -S2 ensemble members (dotted blue), the ACCESS -S2 ensemble mean (solid
> blue), GraphCast (dashed yellow) and FourCastNetV2 ( dashed red). The daily SAM index is obtained by projecting
> the sea level pressure anomaly of the southern hemisphere (75S -25S) to the observed EOF1 pattern, and
> normalizing by the observed standard deviation of the monthly SAM index.

# 3.2 The 2.5 -year hindcast period 

This section presents an additional analysis with the 2.5 -year hindcast that is independent of the ML 

model s training periods . The physical model used here as a benchmark is the more recent global coupled 

model configuration, GC5 , rather than the GC2 model used in ACCESS -S2. The focus is to highlight any 

key differences from the results in the previous section, while also identifying areas of consistency to 

build confidence in findings across both hindcast periods. Where possible, the assessment methods from 

the previous section were repeated. However, a major limitation of this shorter period is the inability to 

compute anomalies with respect to the model's climatology . Using a n ML model climatology from a 

longer period overlapping with the ML model training windows would compromise data independence, 

and the 2.5 -year period alone is too short to establish a reliable climatology. As a compromise, all 

anomalies are calculated with respect to the ERA5 climatology (1981 -2018). Since the anomalies are not 

with respect to the model’s lead -time dependent climatology, model biases (including lead -time 

dependent biases ) are not accounted for , and it is therefore likely that the results shown here are an 

underestim ate of what the model performance would be without this limitation . In addition, given the 

very short analysis period, the sample size of events (e.g. MJOs of a given phases) is very small. This 

means that there is considerable noise in the results compared to the 38 -year analysis. OFFICIAL   

> OFFICIAL
> Figure 12: Globally averaged correlation skills of (a) 10m u -wind speed, (b) 850 hPa temperature, (c) mean sea level
> pressure, and (d) rainfall for lead weeks 1 to 4 for the 2.5 -year hindcast. Yellow, red, dark blue and light blue bars
> show the correlations for GraphCast, FourCastNetV2, the 9 -member GC5 ensemble mean and a single member of
> GC5 respectively. All anomalies are defined relative to the ERA5 climatology for the period 1981 -2018.

3.2.1 Weekly skill 

Globally -averaged weekly correlation skills of 10m u -wind speed, 850 hPa temperature, mean sea level 

pressure, and rainfall for weeks 1 to 4 for the 2.5 -year hindcast period are presented in Figure 12 . The 

broad patterns in correlation skill with lead week are consistent with those in the 38 -year hindcast period, 

although here GC5 tends to show slightly higher correlation skills compared to the ML models 

(particularly for week 2) than ACCESS -S2 did in the 38 -year hindcast period. This is not surprising since 

ACCESS -S2 is built on the GC2 model, several model versions behind GC5. In addition, GC5 was run at 

a higher spatial resolution (~40km) compared to ACCESS -S2 (~60km). Nonetheless, the main source of 

additional skill in GC5 over the ML models is in the ensemble mean, reinforcing the conclusion that there 

is value in exploring the impact of ensemble methods for ML models alongside ensemble physical model 

systems. 

Mirroring those in the previous section, m aps of the  correlation skill for weekly mean screen -level 

temperature and precipitation anomalies for week s 1 and 3 are shown in Figure s 13 and 14 . As with OFFICIAL 

OFFICIAL 

Figure 13: The upper -row figures illustrate the anomaly correlation skills of weekly temperature at 1.5m at lead 

time week 1 across the 2.5 -year hindcast period for: a single GC5 ensemble member (a), GraphCast (b), 

and FourCastNetV2 (c). The bottom -row fig ures (d –f) represent the same variables as the upper row but at lead 

time week 3. All anomalies are defined relative to the ERA5 climatology for the period 1981 -2018. 

Figure 14: As in Figure 13 except for precipitation. OFFICIAL 

> OFFICIAL

ACCESS -S2 in the previous section, h ere the GC5 map s are for a single ensemble member, not the 

ensemble mean. It is clear that due to the short hindcast period, the maps are noisi er than those from the 

38 -year period (Figures 2 and 3 ). In addition, the results will be highly sensitive to the drivers active 

during the 2.5 -year hindcast period and are probably significantly influenced by individual weather 

events . T herefore , caution should be exercised in over -interpreting the results in comparison with the 38 -

year period .

For screen -level temperature at week 1, as was seen for the 38 -year period results, the ML models both 

show comparable or higher skill over the land compared to the physical model (Figure 13 ). Over the 

oceans, for GraphCast and GC5 , the skill is relatively higher for the 2.5 -year period (although GC5 does 

perform worse over equatorial Africa and the eastern Maritime Continent including the western equatorial 

Pacific) , whereas for FourCastNetV2 the extratropical oceans are somewhat less skilful in the 2.5 -year 

period compared to the 38 -year period , and FourCastNetV2 has the lowest overall skill over the oceans of 

all three models. 

At week 3, a s was seen for the 38 -year period, the physical model has superior skill over the oceans, 

which is not surprising given it is the only model to feature an ocean component. While the broad patterns 

of high and low correlation s are consistent between the three models, the ML models feature more areas 

of lower correlations , such as in the Indian ocean and mid -latitude s of the Atlantic Ocean .

As expected, t he maps of skill for rainfall (Figure 14 ) are nois ier than those for temperature. In the 2. 5-

year period, t he skill that emerges at week 3 over the equatorial Pacific for GraphCast is potentially less 

prominent with respect to that from the physical model than it was in the 38 -year period (Figure 3).

While there is more noise in the correlation maps here compared to those from the 38 -year hindcast , in 

general, the spatial distribution of high and low correlations are similar , as is the degree of change in the 

correlation skills from week 1 to week 3. However, it is also clear that the small sample size makes it 

challenging to draw any robust conclusions. 

3.2.2 The MJO 

The RMM indices for the 2.5 -year hindcast are computed in the same way as for the 38 -year hindcast, 

except that anomalies are calculated using the ERA5 climatology from 1981 to 2018, instead of the 

model’s own climatology as was done for the 38 -year hindcast period. As such, systematic model biases 

are not removed from the anomalies by this procedure. OFFICIAL 

> OFFICIAL

Two cases (chosen arbitrarily) from the 2.5 -year hindcast period are presented in Figure 15 , with forecasts 

initialised on the 1 st of March 2023, and the 1 st of March 2024 for GC5, GraphCast and FourCastNetV2 .

In each case the forecast s ha d a lead -time of 28 days. 

Considering the MJO phase diagram of the 2023 case, the MJO event began in the western Pacific ,

intensif ied as it propagated across the Pacific and Atlantic region s, and began to weaken before entering 

the Indian Ocean region . All models capture d th e intensif ication of the MJO in the Pacific and its 

eastward propagation in the first two weeks , as shown in both phase diagram and zonal wind anomalies .

In the March 2024 case , wh ere the MJO is already active at forecast initializ ation and move s from the 

Ma ritime Continent to the Western Pacific , the two ML models appear to do a better job in capturing the 

magnitude of MJO than GC5 , although Graph Cast significantly underestimates the propagation speed 

compared to ER A5 and the other models. Th ese two cases highlight that the relative performance of the 

ML models and GC5 in predicting the MJO varies depending on the specific cases , but that in general the 

ML models are capable of producing a reasonable MJO. 

The RMSE and correlation skill of the models for predicting the MJO over the 2.5 -year hindcast are 

shown in Figure 16 . The GC5 ensemble mean has correlation skills more similar to that of the individual 

ensemble members than was seen in the 38 -year hindcast (Figure 5). This may be due to the different 

ensemble generation methods used for GC5 and ACCESS -S2 in this study , resulting in less spread in the 

ensemble members in the tropics using the GC5 system and therefore less added benefit of an ensemble 

mean . ACCESS -S2 's perturbation of the atmosphere initial conditions is focussed on optimising for the 

sub -sea sonal timescale (Wedd et al., 2022) , whereas the experiments with GC5 use the MOGREPS 

weather forecast initial perturbations (Bowler et al ., 20 08 ). FourCastNetV2 has skill similar to GC5 over 

the first week of the forecast and is competitive with individual ensemble members thereafter. The 

amplitude prediction skill of the models in the 2.5 -year hindcast period (not shown) has similar properties 

to the 38 year hindcast period (Figure 6), with GraphCast overpredicting the magnitude of the MJO signal 

beyond two weeks, and ACCESS -S2 and FourCastNetV2 predicting it more skilfully with a small 

underestimati on relative to ERA5. 

The most obvious difference between the results of the 38 -year period and the 2.5 -year period is the much 

poorer performance of GraphCast in the latter, relative to the other models. This is also consistent with the 

low and negative correlation s seen for GraphCast in the vicinity of the Maritime Continent in Figure 13 .

GraphCast suffers from relatively large wind biases in the Maritime Continent region relative to both 

ACCESS -S2 and FourCastNetV2 in the 38 -year period (Figure 7) and compared to GC5 and 

FourCastNetV2 in the 2.5 -year period (Figure 17). In the 38 -year period, these model -dependent biases OFFICIAL 

OFFICIAL 

Figure 15: The phase diagram (top row) for two MJO events, beginning from the 1st of March 2023 (left column) 

and the 1st of March 2024 (right column), and the corresponding U850 anomalies evolution for each event in 

(from top to bottom) ERA5, the GC5 ense mble mean, one GC5 ensemble member, GraphCast, and FourCastNetV2. OFFICIAL 

OFFICIAL 

Figure 16: MJO anomaly correlation (left) and RMSE (right) skill for all months in all years from Jan 2022 to Jun 2024 

for GC5 ensemble members (dotted blue), the GC5 ensemble mean (solid blue), GraphCast (yellow) and 

FourCastNetV2 (red). Anomalies are cal culated with respect to the ERA5 climatology (1981 -2018) rather than the 

model’s own climatology. 

Figure 17: Weekly -average 850 hPa annual mean wind biases relative to ERA5 across the 2.5 -year hindcast period 

for (a) GraphCast, (b) FourCastNetV2, (c) one GC5 ensemble member, and (d) the GC5 ensemble mean, at lead 

week 3. The biases are calculated by computing weekly means along lead ti me, followed by annual means across 

model runs, and then subtracting from the equivalent from ERA5, before averaging the difference across the 2.5 -

year hindcast period. OFFICIAL 

> OFFICIAL

are removed in the calculation of the anomalies and GraphCast MJO forecast skill is competitive to that 

of FourCastNetV2 and ACCESS -S2. However, for the 2.5 -year period, when the ERA5 climatology is 

used to create the anomalies (and the lead -time dependant model bias is not removed), this has a larger 

effect on GraphCast than the other models. Additionally, d espite the limited sample size , we can observe 

the slow MJO propagation in GraphCast (Fig ure 18) for phases 1 and 3 , consistent with the 38 -year 

climatological results , and conversely, propagation speeds close to those of events in ERA5 for phase 2 ,

which is not consistent with the 38 -year climatological results . Clearly th ese observation s should be 

treated with caution given the very limited number of MJO cases available in this period (e.g., there w ere 

no GC5 MJO cases in the sample that started in phase 1 and remained active for at least 5 days ). We have 

not repeated the MJO rainfall composites for the 2.5 -year hindcast period because there were insufficient 

MJO events. 

3.2.3 The SAM 

Correlation and RMSE skills for the SAM index are presented in Figure 19. The conclusions for the 

performance of the SAM from the 2.5 -year period are broadly similar to that from the 38-year period -

that the ML models have performance similar to the ensemble mean of the physical model at shorter lead -

times and are generally comparable with the ensemble members thereafter . Interestingly, the RMSE for 

GC5 is unexpectedly high for the first ~3 days compared to the ML models . This is likely due to the large r

sea level pressure biases present in GC5 at southern hemisphere high latitudes at early lead -times ( not 

shown ), which could impact the SAM index in the 2.5 -year hindcast period since the sea level pressure 

anomalies were calculated relative to an E RA5 climatology rather than the model ’s own climatology. 

As with the MJO rainfall composites , we have not repeated the SAM EOF calculations for the 2.5 -year 

hindcast period because there were insufficient samples .

# 4 Discussio n

The investigation of skill in both the 38 -year and 2.5 -year hindcasts show ed that GraphCast and 

FourCastNetV2 are broadly competitive with the ensemble means of both ACCESS -S2 and GC5 ,

respectively , at short lead -times (<2 weeks) , and are competitive with the physical model ensemble 

members and inferior to the physical model ensemble mean s at longer lead times (>2 weeks) . This is clear 

from both the globally averaged results and the skill for forecasts of the SAM and MJO . It shows that the 

models are relatively stable out to longer leads , and the ir performance is impressive given that the y were 

not developed for sub -seasonal prediction. OFFICIAL 

OFFICIAL 

Figure 18: Left Column: Phase diagrams for all MJO events in the 2.5 -year hindcast period active for more than 5 

days starting in phase 1 (top), phase 2 (middle) and phase 3 (bottom) for GC5 (blue), GraphCast (yellow), 

FourCastNetV2 (red), and ERA5 (black) . A threshold of being active for 5 days was used instead of the 14 days used 

for the 38 -year hindcast period due to the limited number of MJO cases in the 2.5 -year hindcast period. The 

dashed lines show individual MJO events, and the solid lines show the composite of all events. Right column: OFFICIAL 

OFFICIAL 

Composite phase speed plots for all MJO events in the 2.5 -year hindcast period active for more than 5 days starting 

in phase 1 (top), phase 2 (middle) and phase 3 (bottom) for GC5 (blue), GraphCast (yellow), FourCastNetV2 (red), 

and ERA5 (black). On this p lot, a faster propagating MJO event has a steeper slope, and a slower event has a 

shallower slope. Open circles indicate a composite amplitude that is weak (less than 1) while solid circles indicate a 

composite amplitude greater than 1. The number of case s contributing to the figure for each dataset is indicated in 

the legend of the right column plots. No MJO cases in GC5 met the criteria in phase 1 (top row). 

Figure 19: Daily SAM index correlation (left) and RMSE (right) skill for all months in all years from Jan 2022 to Jun 

2024 for GC5 ensemble members (dotted blue), the GC5 ensemble mean (solid blue), GraphCast (yellow) and 

FourCastNetV2 (red). The daily SAM index is obtained by projecting the sea level pressure anomaly of the southern 

hemisphere (75S -25S) relative to the ERA5 climatology to the observed (ERA5) EOF1 pattern and normalizing by the 

observed (ERA5) standard deviation of the monthly SAM index. Th e climatology, EOF1 pattern, and standard 

deviation of the monthly SAM index of ERA5 were all calculated over the period 1981 -2018. 

However, the spatial maps indicate that there are key deficiencies in the ML models for sub -seasonal 

prediction . At week 3 of the forecasts, whilst the ML models indicate similar regions of high skill 

compared to the physical models, the ir skill over the tropical and midlatitude oceans is significantly lower 

than that from the physical models (Figures 2, 3, 13, and 14 ). This probably underscores the lack of ocean 

variables as predictors for the ML models , which are important for sub -seasonal prediction and become 

increasingly important as lead -time increases . The lack of ocean variables and representation of coupled 

ocean -atmosphere processes may also be playing a role in the relatively lower skill in the ML models , and 

GraphCast in particular, in the region of the Maritime Continent. 

Despite not having variables from the ocean sub -surface , and even though coupling with the ocean is 

thought to be important for the MJO , the results from the 38 -year and 2.5 -year hindcast s indicate that the OFFICIAL 

> OFFICIAL

ML models have good skill for forecasts of the MJO . GraphCast does, however, overestimate the 

amplitude of events beyond the first week in the 38 -year hindcast (Figure 6) and the 2.5 year hindcast (not 

shown) , possibly due to large U850 wind biases over the Maritime Continent . The case studies (including 

those in the 2.5 year hindcast outside the ML model training period) show that the ML models can 

simulate reasonable looking MJOs, which are not distinguishable as being from ML models without prior 

knowledge (Figures 4 and 15 ). Rainfall composites from the 38 -year hindcast (Figure 9) also show that 

GraphCast effectively capture s the relationship between MJO phase and tropical rainfall , indicating its 

capability to represent broad -scale atmospheric relationships. However, the composite values are overly 

strong at longer leads (e.g., week 3) , potentially reflecting a tendency of the mode l to smooth fields with 

increasing lead -time (as shown in Husain et al., 2025 ). More recent models like AIFS -CRPS (Lang et al., 

2024) , GenCast ( Price et al., 2025 ), Fu Xi-ENS ( Zhong et al., 2025 ), and FourCastNet V3 (Bonev et al., 

2025) exhibit less smooth ing , due to a variety of factors including : use of diffusion and other generative 

architectures ; loss functions which reward accurate prediction of the whole forecast distribution like 

CRPS (Continuous Ranked Probability Score) instead of metrics focussed on the middle of the 

distribution like RMSE ; and injection of noise into the model at each timestep . It would be interesting to 

examine if the se models produce tropical rainfall pattern s with more realistic amplitude s at extended lead -

times .

The results of this study also raise the question of the extent to which the skill of the ML models 

examined could be improved by an ensemble forecast. While GraphCast and FourCastNetV2 were not 

designed to produce an ensemble forecast , AIFS -CRPS was (as were GenCast, FuXi -ENS, and 

FourCastNetV3) , and results show that when forecasting to sub -seasonal lead -times (including for the 

MJO ) it outperforms the ECMWF physical model when dealing with full fields (i.e. when not removing 

the bias) and is comparable when forecasting anomalies (Lang et al., 2024). Since they do not natively 

produce ensemble outputs, construct ing an ensemble with GraphCast and FourCastNetV2 would require 

traditional approaches like initial condition perturbation or time -lagged ensembles. However, w hile such 

strategies have been explored for ML models on weather timescales (e.g., Bi et al., 2023), very few end 

up with well -calibrated ensembles. It remains unclear to what extent it is beneficial to ensure ensemble 

perturbations and spread are flow -dependent to better reflect the spatial and temporal characteristics of 

uncertainty, rather than just satisfying bulk statistical properties. 

One of the key advantages of ML models is their significantly lower computational cost and faster 

inference time. This makes them particularly attractive for sub -seasonal and seasonal prediction, where 

generating hindcasts can be completed orders of magnitude more quickly and cheaply than with 

traditional methods. Additionally, unlike physical models, ML models (in theory) do not need to OFFICIAL 

> OFFICIAL

accurately simulate every intermediate physical process linking a climate driver - such as the El Niño –

Southern Oscillation - to its teleconnected impacts. This opens the possibility that ML models could still 

capture downstream effects even when the intermediate processes are poorly represented in the model (or 

even the training data ). In other words, ML models can potentially learn both the teleconnections and the 

underlying physical processes independently , rather than relying on teleconnections to emerge from the 

modelled physics. While the analysis presented here does not directly address this hypothesis, it provides 

a foundation for future studies that aim to explore these questions in greater depth. 

There was reasonable agreement between the assessments undertaken in the 38 -year and 2.5 -year hindcast 

periods in the high -level conclusions, providing greater confidence in the results, and demonstrating the 

value of our approach to mitigating the limited independent evaluation period. However , it is also clear 

that the 2.5 -year period is too short to obtain robust conclusions about sub -seasonal prediction . There are 

significant challenges around having a large enough sample to create climatologies (to enable model bias 

correction) and having enough samples of events, such as different phases of the MJO. As outlined in the 

Introductio n, a key challenge in evaluating ML models for sub -seasonal , seasonal, and longer timescales 

is the limited amount of independent data available for evaluation after training. While this is generally 

sufficient for weather timescales, it becomes inadequate at extended timescales. Our compromise 

approach - comparing results across two hindcast periods - relies on the assumption that agreement 

between them reflects robustness in the results. This is of course not without limitation s, since any 

apparent agreement may be due to a coincidental alignment between the 2.5 -year sample and the 38 -year 

sample. Furthermore, the inability to remove a model -dependent climatology in comput ing the anomalies 

for the 2.5 year period , meaning biases are not accounted for, mak es direct comparison to the 38 -year 

hindcast analysis more challenging. This method is therefore not intended as a n optimal solution, but 

rather a temporary workaround for cases where insufficient evaluation data has been retained. A more 

robust alternative would be to reduce the training period to preserve a longer evaluation window, although 

this becomes increasingly impractical as the required verification period grows with forecast lead time. 

This underscores a fundamental challenge facing the community as ML models are applied to extended -

range and multi -year prediction. 

# 5 Conclusions 

To g ain an initial insight into the performance of ML models for sub -seasonal prediction, two medium 

range ML weather models , G raphCast and FourCastNetV2 , have been investigated. Despite not being 

designed for sub -seasonal prediction and lacking ensembles, they have been found to demonstrate OFFICIAL 

> OFFICIAL

surprisingly good performance at longer lead times and in capturing key drivers of climate variability, 

specifically the MJO and the SAM .

A dual -hindcast approach has been explored , involving the use of a long hindcast period to obtain robust 

results , though this overlaps the ML model training data, alongside a shorter , but independent hindcast 

set . Assessing the degree of agreement (or disagreement) between the two provides a measure of 

confidence in the trustworthiness of the overall evaluation . Although this strategy is not as effective as a 

single long and independent dataset, it offers a practical solution considering the limited independent data 

available for evaluation for many ML weather models. Looking ahead, it is recommended that , as much 

as possible, developers of ML models targeting sub -seasonal and longer timescales retain sufficient data 

outside the training window to enable robust evaluation. 

The assessment presented here lays the groundwork for future research focussed on ML models 

specifically designed for sub -seasonal prediction – those that includ e an ensemble approach and consider 

variables linked to low -frequency predictability , such as those from the ocean, stratosphere and land 

surface . Further evaluation sh ould also investigate the capability of ML models to predict extreme and 

high -impact sub -seasonal events. 

ML models are rapidly transforming weather and climate prediction, offering exciting opportunities and 

new challenges. More work establishing baseline evaluations of these models against physical models 

will be important going forwards. 

# Acknowledgements 

We thank many staff across the Bureau for their efforts, advice and feedback contrib uting to this work. 

We thank Matthew Wheeler, Hanh Nguyen, and Rajashree Naha for valuable review of this manuscript 

prior to submission . We also thank ECMWF for providing invaluable datasets such as ERA5 to the 

research community. This work was partly funded by Meat & Livestock Australia, the Queensland 

Government through the Drought and Climate Adaptation Program, and the University of Southern 

Queensland through the Northern Australia Climate Program (NACP). 

# Data Availability 

ACCESS -S2 data are published on the National Computational Infrastructure (NCI) and are available for 

research purposes 1. GraphCast, FourCastNetV2 and GC5 data used in this study are available on request.  

> 1https://geonetwork.nci.org.au/geonetwork/srv/eng/catalog.search#/metadata/f3311_4920_0252_8073 OFFICIAL
> OFFICIAL

# References 

Alet, F., Price, I., El -Kadi, A., Masters, D., Markou, S., Andersson, T. R., ... & Battaglia, P. (2025). 

Skillful joint probabilistic weather forecasting from marginals. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.10772. 

Antonio, B., Strommen, K., & Christensen, H. M. (2025). Seasonal forecasting using the GenCast 

probabilistic machine learning model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.06457. 

Ben Bouallègue, Z., Clare, M. C., Magnusson, L., Gascon, E., Maier -Gerber, M., Janoušek, M., ... & 

Pappenberger, F. (2024). The Rise of Data -Driven Weather Forecasting: A First Statistical 

Assessment of Machine Learning –Based Weather Forecasts in an Operat ional -Like 

Context. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 105(6), E864 -E883. 

Bi, K., Xie, L., Zhang, H., Chen, X., Gu, X., & Tian, Q. (2023). Accurate medium -range global weather 

forecasting with 3D neural networks. Nature, 619(7970), 533 -538. 

Bonavita, M. (2023). On some limitations of data -driven weather forecasting models. arXiv e -prints, 

arXiv -2309. 

Bonev, B., Kurth, T., Hundt, C., Pathak, J., Baust, M., Kashinath, K., & Anandkumar, A. (2023, July). 

Spherical fourier neural operators: Learning stable dynamics on the sphere. In International 

conference on machine learning (pp. 2806 -2823). PMLR. 

Bonev, B., Kurth, T., Mahesh, A., Bisson, M., Kossaifi, J., Kashinath, K., ... & Keller, A. (2025). 

FourCastNet 3: A geometric approach to probabilistic machine -learning weather forecasting at 

scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.12144. 

Bowler, N. E., Arribas, A., Mylne, K. R., Robertson, K. B., & Beare, S. E. (2008). The MOGREPS short‐ 

range ensemble prediction system. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society: A 

journal of the atmospheric sciences, applied meteorology and physical oceanography , 134 (632), 

703 -722. 

Brenowitz, N. D., Cohen, Y., Pathak, J., Mahesh, A., Bonev, B., Kurth, T., ... & Pritchard, M. S. (2025). A 

practical probabilistic benchmark for ai weather models. Geophysical Research Letters, 52(7), 

e2024GL113656. 

Camargo SJ, Wheeler MC, Sobel AH (2009) Diagnosis of the MJO modulation of tropical cyclogenesis 

using an empirical index. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 66, 3061 –3074. OFFICIAL 

> OFFICIAL

Chen, L., Zhong, X., Zhang, F., Cheng, Y., Xu, Y., Qi, Y., & Li, H. (2023). FuXi: A cascade machine 

learning forecasting system for 15 -day global weather forecast. npj Climate and Atmospheric 

Science, 6(1), 190. 

Cowan, T., Wheeler, M. C., & Marshall, A. G. (2023). The combined influence of the Madden –Julian 

Oscillation and El Niño –Southern Oscillation on Australian rainfall. Journal of Climate, 36(2), 

313 –334.  https://doi.org/10.1175/JCLI -D-22 -0357.1[1 ]

DeMaria, M., Franklin, J. L., Chirokova, G., Radford, J., DeMaria, R., Musgrave, K. D., & Ebert -Uphoff, 

I. (2025). An operations -based evaluation of tropical cyclone track and intensity forecasts from 

artificial intelligence weather prediction models. Arti ficial Intelligence for the Earth 

Systems, 4(4), 240085. 

Diao, C., & Barnes, E. A. (2025). Assessing MJO Tropical -Extratropical Teleconnections in Deep 

Learning Weather Prediction Models. Authorea Preprints. 

Ding, R., Li, J., & Seo, K. H. (2010). Predictability of the Madden –Julian oscillation estimated using 

observational data. Monthly Weather Review, 138(3), 1004 -1013. 

Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai, X., Unterthiner, T., ... & Houlsby, N. 

(2020). An image is worth 16x16 words. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929, 7. 

Dunstan, T., Strickson, O., Bennett, T., Bowyer, J., Burnand, M., Chappell, J., ... & Hosking, J. S. (2025). 

FastNet: Improving the physical consistency of machine -learning weather prediction models 

through loss function design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.1 7601. 

Gillett NP, Kell TD, Jones PD (2006) Regional climate impacts of the southern annular mode. 

Geophysical Research Letters 33, L23704.  https://doi.org/10.1029/2006GL027721 .

Guan, H., Arcomano, T., Chattopadhyay, A., & Maulik, R. (2024). LUCIE: A Lightweight Uncoupled 

ClImate Emulator with long -term stability and physical consistency for O (1000) -member 

ensembles. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16297. 

Hakim, G. J., & Masanam, S. (2024). Dynamical tests of a deep -learning weather prediction 

model. Artificial Intelligence for the Earth Systems. 

Harrison, D. R., McGovern, A., Karstens, C. D., Bostrom, A., Demuth, J. L., Jirak, I. L., & Marsh, P. T. 

(2025). An assessment of how domain experts evaluate machine learning in operational 

meteorology. Weather and Forecasting, 40(3), 393 -410. OFFICIAL 

> OFFICIAL

Hendon HH, Wheeler MC, Zhang C (2007a). Seasonal dependence of the MJO -ENSO relationship. 

Journal of Climate 20(3), 531 –543. 

Hendon HH, Thompson DWJ, Wheeler MC (2007b), Australian rainfall and surface temperature 

variations associated with the Southern Hemisphere annular mode. Journal of Climate 20, 2452 –

2467. 

Hersbach, H., Bell, B., Berrisford, P., Hirahara, S., Horányi, A., Muñoz‐Sabater, J., ... & Thépaut, J. N. 

(2020). The ERA5 global reanalysis. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological 

Society, 146(730), 1999 -2049. 

Hudson, D., Alves, O., Hendon, H.H., et al. 2017: ACCESS -S1: The new Bureau of Meteorology multi -

week to seasonal prediction system. Journal of Southern Hemisphere Earth Systems Science, 67:3 

132 -159 doi: 10.22499/3.6703.001 

Husain, S. Z., Separovic, L., Caron, J. F., Aider, R., Buehner, M., Chamberland, S., ... & Zadra, A. (2025). 

Leveraging data -driven weather models for improving numerical weather prediction skill through 

large -scale spectral nudging. Weather and Forecastin g, 40(9), 1749 -1771. 

Jiang, X., Adames, Á. F., Kim, D., Maloney, E. D., Lin, H., Kim, H., Zhang, C., DeMott, C. A., & 

Klingaman, N. P. (2020). Fifty years of research on the Madden‐Julian Oscillation: Recent 

progress, challenges, and perspectives. Journal of Geophysical Resear ch: Atmospheres, 125(17). 

Kalnay, E., Kanamitsu, M., Kistler, R., Collins, W., Deaven, D., Gandin, L., ... & Joseph, D. (2018). The 

NCEP/NCAR 40 -year reanalysis project. In Renewable energy (pp. Vol1_146 -Vol1_194). 

Routledge. 

Kovachki, N., Li, Z., Liu, B., Azizzadenesheli, K., Bhattacharya, K., Stuart, A., & Anandkumar, A. 

(2023). Neural operator: Learning maps between function spaces with applications to 

pdes. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(89), 1 -97. 

Lam, R., Sanchez -Gonzalez, A., Willson, M., Wirnsberger, P., Fortunato, M., Alet, F., ... & Battaglia, P. 

(2023). Learning skillful medium -range global weather forecasting. Science, 382(6677), 1416 -

1421. 

Lang, S., Alexe, M., Chantry, M., Dramsch, J., Pinault, F., Raoult, B., ... & Rabier, F. (2024a). AIFS -

ECMWF's data -driven forecasting system. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01465. OFFICIAL 

> OFFICIAL

Lang, S., Alexe, M., Clare, M. C., Roberts, C., Adewoyin, R., Bouallègue, Z. B., ... & Leutbecher, M. 

(2024b). AIFS -CRPS: Ensemble forecasting using a model trained with a loss function based on 

the Continuous Ranked Probability Score. arXiv preprint arXiv :2412.15832. 

Liu, X., Chen, J., Zhu, Y., Liu, Y., Chen, F., Huo, Z., ... & Gong, Y. (2025). Global Ensemble Weather 

Prediction from a Deep Learning –Based Model (Pangu -Weather) with the Initial Condition 

Perturbations of CMA -GEPS. Advances in Atmospheric Sciences, 1 -25. 

Mahesh, A., Collins, W., Bonev, B., Brenowitz, N., Cohen, Y., Elms, J., ... & Willard, J. (2024). Huge 

ensembles part i: Design of ensemble weather forecasts using spherical fourier neural 

operators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03100. 

Marshall, A. G., Hudson, D., Wheeler, M. C., Hendon, H. H., & Alves, O. (2012). Simulation and 

prediction of the Southern Annular Mode and its influence on Australian intra -seasonal climate in 

POAMA. Climate Dynamics, 38(11 –12), 2483 –2502. https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s00382 -011 -1140 -z

Marshall, A. G., and Hendon, H. H. (2019). Multi -week prediction of the Madden –Julian oscillation with 

ACCESS -S1. Clim. Dyn. 52, 2513 –2528 

Morisseau, H., Zhu, H., Hudson, D. & de Burgh -Day, C. (February, 2025). Object -oriented verification of 

TC -Jasper rainfall forecasts: machine learning model versus physical models. Bureau Research 

Report No. 106, Bureau of Meteorology, Melbourne, Victoria  https://nla.gov.au/nla.obj -

3603384794 

Neena, J. M., Lee, J. Y., Waliser, D., Wang, B., & Jiang, X. (2014). Predictability of the Madden –Julian 

Oscillation in the Intraseasonal Variability Hindcast Experiment (ISVHE). Journal of Climate, 

27(12), 4531 –4543.  https://doi.org/10.1175/JCLI -D-13 -00624.1[1 ]

Olivetti, L., & Messori, G. (2025). Whose weather is it? A fairness framework for data -driven weather 

forecasting. Environmental Research Letters , 20 (12), 121006. 

Pathak, J., Subramanian, S., Harrington, P., Raja, S., Chattopadhyay, A., Mardani, M., ... & Anandkumar, 

A. (2022). Fourcastnet: A global data -driven high -resolution weather model using adaptive 

fourier neural operators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.11214. 

Price, I., Sanchez -Gonzalez, A., Alet, F., Andersson, T. R., El -Kadi, A., Masters, D., ... & Willson, M. 

(2025). Probabilistic weather forecasting with machine learning. Nature , 637 (8044), 84 -90. OFFICIAL 

> OFFICIAL

Rasp, S., Hoyer, S., Merose, A., Langmore, I., Battaglia, P., Russell, T., ... & Sha, F. (2024). 

WeatherBench 2: A benchmark for the next generation of data‐driven global weather 

models. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems, 16(6), e2023MS004019. 

Robertson, A.W. and Vitart, F. (2019) Sub -seasonal to seasonal prediction. Elsevier. Available from: 

https://doi.org/10.1016/c2016 -0-01594 -2

Sahu, P. L., Sandeep, S., & Kodamana, H. (2025). Evaluating global machine learning models for tropical 

cyclone dynamics and thermodynamics. Journal of Geophysical Research: Machine Learning and 

Computation, 2(2), e2025JH000594. 

Sun, Y. Q., Hassanzadeh, P., Zand, M., Chattopadhyay, A., Weare, J., & Abbot, D. S. (2025). Can AI 

weather models predict out -of -distribution gray swan tropical cyclones?. Proceedings of the 

National Academy of Sciences, 122(21), e2420914122. 

Thompson DWJ, Wallace JM (2000) Annular Modes in the Extratropical Circulation. Part I: Month -to -

Month Variability. Journal of Climate 13, 1000 –1016. 

Vitart, F. (2017). Madden –Julian Oscillation Prediction and Teleconnections in the S2S Database. 

Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 143:2210 –2220 

Watt -Meyer, O., Dresdner, G., McGibbon, J., Clark, S. K., Henn, B., Duncan, J., ... & Bretherton, C. S. 

(2023). ACE: A fast, skillful learned global atmospheric model for climate prediction. arXiv 

preprint arXiv:2310.02074. 

Wedd R et al (2022) ACCESS -S2: the upgraded Bureau of Meteorology multi -week to seasonal 

prediction system. Journal of Southern Hemisphere Earth Systems Science 72(3), 218 –242. 

doi:10.1071/ES22026 

Weyn, J. A., Durran, D. R., Caruana, R., & Cresswell‐Clay, N. (2021). Sub‐seasonal forecasting with a 

large ensemble of deep‐learning weather prediction models. Journal of Advances in Modeling 

Earth Systems, 13(7), e2021MS002502. 

Wheeler, M. C., & Hendon, H. H. (2004). An all -season real -time multivariate MJO index: Development 

of an index for monitoring and prediction. Monthly weather review, 132(8), 1917 -1932. 

Wheeler MC, McBride JL (2005) Australian -Indonesian monsoon. In: W.K.M. Lau and D.E. Waliser 

(eds), Intraseasonal Variability in the Atmosphere -Ocean Climate System. Praxis, Springer Berlin 

Heidelberg, pages 125 -173. OFFICIAL 

> OFFICIAL

Wheeler, M. C., and H. H. Hendon, S. Cleland, H. Meinke, and A. Donald, 2009: Impacts 

of the Madden –Julian oscillation on Australian rainfall and circulation. J. Climate, 22, 1482 –

1498, https://doi.org/10.1175/2008JCLI2595.1 

White, C. J., Domeisen, D. I., Acharya, N., Adefisan, E. A., Anderson, M. L., Aura, S., ... & Wilson, R. G. 

(2022). Advances in the application and utility of subseasonal -to -seasonal predictions. Bulletin of 

the American Meteorological Society, 103(6), E14 48 -E1472. 

Xiong, X., Hu, W., Zhou, S., Bi, K., Xie, L., Liu, Y., ... & Tian, Q. (2025). Bridging the Gap Between 

Bayesian Deep Learning and Ensemble Weather Forecasts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.14218. 

Zhong, X., Chen, L., Li, H., Buizza, R., Liu, J., Feng, J., ...  & Lu, B. (2025). FuXi -ENS: A machine 

learning model for efficient and accurate ensemble weather prediction. Science Advances, 11(44), 

eadu2854.